https://www.colorado.edu/researchinnovation/nsf-partnerships-innovation-research-partnerships-pfi-rp
[Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) (nsf23538) | NSF - National Science Foundation](https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2023/nsf23538/nsf23538.pdf)
Proposal due 2 May 2023
The Technology Translation (PFI-TT) track offers an NSF-funded researcher the opportunity to translate her or his prior NSF-funded research results in any field of science or engineering into technological innovations with promising commercial potential and societal impact. PFI-TT supports commercial potential demonstration projects for academic research outputs in any NSF-funded science and engineering discipline. This demonstration is achieved through proof-ofconcept, prototyping, technology development and/or scale-up work. Concurrently, students and postdoctoral researchers who participate in PFI-TT projects receive education and leadership training in innovation and entrepreneurship. Successful PFI-TT projects generate technology-driven commercialization outcomes that address societal needs.
The Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) track seeks to achieve the same goals as the PFI-TT track by supporting instead complex, multi-faceted technology development projects that are typically beyond the scope of a single researcher or institution and require a multi-organizational, interdisciplinary, synergistic collaboration. A PFI-RP project requires the creation of partnerships between academic researchers and third-party organizations such as industry, nonacademic research organizations, federal laboratories, public or non-profit technology transfer organizations or other universities. Such partnerships are needed to conduct use-inspired research on a stand-alone, larger project towards commercialization and societal impact. In the absence of such synergistic partnership the project’s likelihood for success would be minimal.