So I thought that it would be helpful if the thing that we have been referring to as "Deep Design" had a name, so I picked it pretty arbitrarily and then I liked Deep Design because it had two Ds in it. It was fun to say. It probably didn't go a lot deeper than that. 
But people like Ellen quite regularly question that almost immediately. I think Mark did, too. Like, what's so deep about it? And that's great. I mean, I will often put something out there just to try to-- provocate, you know?
I was thinking this week... I was looking at the argument that it's "turtles all the way down." Do you know this argument? Okay, so I heard it originally from Carl Sagan. Carl Sagan was giving this lecture about cosmology and, you know, billions and billions and the expanse of the universe, you know, so on and so forth, and he thought it was going really well, and afterwards, after the lecture, an older woman came up to him with a question and she said, "You know, Mr. Sagan, thank you very much for the amazing lecture. It was very thought-provoking." However, I took issue with some basic... cosmology positions that you've had because I believe that the earth rests on the back of a turtle and that this is the structure of the universe and and Carl Sagan said well I got you you know what's that turtle standing on and she said oh it's turtles all the way down (laughing) Right? So this is an argument, and it's sort of a long tradition of it, and it's kind of this notion of it infinitely regressing, they're, you know, turtles all the way down. - Every answer raises another question that you can just answer with another. - Yeah, the same way, and so I started thinking about that in the context of, Design problems, and I thought well actually maybe design is design all the way down Like the turtles so you know the depth of the design is how many turtles down you've gone. Yeah, and You know I was I was also at that point thinking about I think it comes from the Toyota way of five whys, the five whys to a root cause, and you know, this is sort of a structured way to ask why. So maybe, yeah, and you know, and I taught about the five whys in the class, and my observation has been when you get to the sixth why, somebody usually tells you about you know, how they weren't loved as a child, or, you know, it's just like too many why's at that point. You've gone, you've gone too far down, but five is sort of enough. They start going kind of lateral in a way, or? It just gets, loses context. It's not as, not as relevant. So I thought, well, what if, what if the deepness of deep design is actually... how many designs deep do you go? And it ties to the question of like how do you solve a wicked problem? A wicked problem has another problem that uncovers when you try to solve it and that has another problem that uncovers when you solve it, and so it in a sense the the wickedness of a problem might also be sort of turtles all the way down, and so, this is pretty abstract, which is why I thought it might be fun to talk about it, but, you know, is deep design really a way of acknowledging all the problems that are worth working on are probably wicked problems, and you're going to find regression in the problem, and the proposal of a design solution implies another problem which needs another design solution and so on and so there's a depth to the design act, and maybe even a practical how do we do design kind of thing which is ask why, I don't know if it's five times, but five times, you know. So we're going to go through five regressions on. question of what is the right design solution. Are we going to go five regressions on even the definition of the problem. I was just gonna say like or we're gonna iterate minimum five times you know. How to how to do that how and where you do it because if you say Okay, I guess I'm thinking about maybe think about the Apple car for some reason, okay, they were like I Guess we could if we assume that at some point. They're like we should make a car right They would then go why why is why should we not? Why should we make a car? And, yeah, why is it a car? And why is it that's the thing that we should focus on? Why should we do that? Yeah, before you even go like, "Okay, yes, let's make a car." And then, "Well, we have this problem. Okay, why do we have that problem?" So, it's like asking those "whys." In a way that's like, that allows you to question every step of the process, but also not get stuck in just doing that. Because I think that's the immediate thing that I come to in my head is like, this can just make you spiral in every component. I'm like, okay, well, we're at some way you actually need to make decisions. So going back to that idea of decision making and that balance between the what is often called the gut, but it's usually really, if you're a intuition or you're an architect who's been doing this for 30 years, you can make the decision without saying like. I made this because x y and z reason it's like the door just needs to be red. Yeah, it needs to be this color, right? It's the Knowing more than you can say. Yeah, I think it's the way donald shern would have put it I know I know more than I can say. Yeah But then also Having that ishness to say, "Wait, let's think more deeply about this question or this problem and know how to consistently get to the heart of things and know which things you need to get to the heart of and which things sometimes are things you can't." You couldn't really get to the heart of maybe why the door is red, it just needs to be red. You could probably post-rationalize it, and I think a lot of people do that. Yeah, but to say... I guess I was thinking about the Apple Car because it was cancelled so dramatically after a decade or something, and however many billions of dollars spent. So the decision, like that whole process is really interesting to me because either they went in going, this is purely experiment and we're going to play out this five Ys kind of to like the nth degree. Or they went in saying. Yeah, this is a business decision. We are going to build a, presumably, if we're spending 10 billion bucks on this, 100 billion plus dollar business, and things went awry a long way, majorly. They lost the plot, essentially. Because you could argue, like, it seems totally plausible that Apple could... design a car to compete with like a Tesla. I mean there's great strength, I think there's great strength in in the statement, how hard could this be? Yeah, and you know I think sometimes you just discover pretty hard, it turns out pretty hard. I mean Tesla. Tesla's an interesting counterpoint to the Apple car, because I've been driving a Tesla Model 3 lately, and it's kind of a brilliant car, I mean it's a pretty great car. The business that's operating, I don't think Tesla's a very good business, you know? Customer support, like there's literally no... way to ask a question you can't go to the dealership and you know I mean it's just and that's just the beginning yeah I mean it's it's a very I think in phrase like I hate my Tesla and I'll never buy another brand I'll never buy anything but Tesla yeah that's that sounds yeah that That computes, that sounds like my experience. Really brilliant car. It has some sort of adolescent moments, like you can make a fart noise, and that's a stock feature in the car. - That's classic. - You know? Great, super funny, maybe once. - Signature on it, the rest. Yeah, but the counterpoint with Apple there would be, I would say, Tesla also started from a, how hard could it be to make an electric car? And by the time, you know, what makes that car so brilliant is the accumulation of the car's cool. It's nicely designed, but the idea that you can have a car that largely drives by wire so it can have software updates, how many things do you have to do in order to make that happen? The Ford Motor Company is not going to do that. Not only that, range is a limitation, so now you have to build an international network of superchargers. part of designing the car, you know, and I think where, I mean, Tesla bet everything on that and there was nothing else that they did. Yeah, it was their entire company, and by the time, you know, my Model 3 rolled off the production line, how many... Thousands of core patents did it roll through to get to me. You know, the factory design, the vision systems, the, you know, just probably the tires are different. I mean, I don't even know everything that's different, and I would suspect Apple looked at that after a while, and what I don't understand is why Apple didn't. I mean CarPlay, which is Apple's entree into cars, really sucks. Mmm, I've never... It's better than... I don't think I've used... I've only experienced the shitty... Whatever's in a rental car. Yeah. So when you plug your phone in, it basically puts... lesser version of your phone on a screen, which should, I mean that's better than any other manufacturer's built-in computer system, but I guess where I was going with that is you know, Apple could have been all in and said we're going to make the car and the superchargers and all the software and write our own AIs and you know, or they could have... said okay that's clearly a lot and probably more than we can handle but we could at least make the computer in the car better yeah you know and then they've got licensing deals with Ford and Toyota and Nissan and you know and who knows maybe they're still going to do that although it It does, if I could share one more story, it's one of my stock family stories, that we tell a story about a bathroom where mom wanted to change the wallpaper in the bathroom, and by the time we were done changing the wallpaper in the bathroom, we had a new garage, and I think probably everybody has some version of that story, but it's like new wallpaper. You take the old wallpaper off. Oh Why is the wall so spongy right here? Let's take that out. Oh Bigger problem. Let's take that out. Oh And you know these things spiral they they spiral out of control yeah And I would say that's a bad expression of a deepening design. A deepening design becomes more and more, that becomes more and more hopeless with every step. It's like you can't get in front of it to start, you know, it's just, you just keep uncovering bigger and bigger and bigger problems. So there are other design problems where I think it goes in the other direction, where you're like... I need to replace the wallpaper, oh, let me peel the old and we'll put the new, and we're done, you know. Well, that makes me think about, like that is part of what Tesla's magic was for the first 15 years or however long, was that ability to see, to peel away the paper and see, and Oh, we need to build a whole charger network and actually do it and know where to make those decisions. Yeah, and commit The right amount of effort to make it like good and these thing that now All the other companies are just changing how their cables are so they can use the supercharger. Right, right, and it was that commitment to, this is a major roadblock that we have to, that has to be overcome. We can't rely on anybody else to do it. We just have to do it and make that decision. They could have done like a better job. swap thing and that would change the entire design of their batteries. Well, actually I think they pursued that at one point didn't they? I thought other companies were doing the battery swap thing. But at some point it did become clear that that wasn't the way. Yeah, and there they did have Particularly before the Model 3, when they just had way fewer customers who paid way more money for their cars, that like more concierge support where they would like come to your car and do whatever needed to be done, and there were issues with that, but like they had, and even thinking about the screen and how that works, and the fact that it's more of an iPad and not a phone, it's a lot the junky like shitty touchscreens that you see in so many cars before them and how that's gonna work. So they were like solving all these problems, the door handles, like all those little things that were design problems that became solutions, and I think the Cybertruck completely took them off the rails, and also the scale the like Customer support at scale. Yeah, that's I mean they chose to do anything about and it's right now, right? there was some Good long time where they had some sort of deep design approach that they had a streak of making the right choices, they also happen to have lots of money to support all of those efforts along the way. But the idea to make their own batteries, the Gigafactory thing, all those things, all very intentional. like there's something about the commitment to the vision and I think it feels like lately I mean everything's just clouded by by Musk and his like going off the rails but it is an interesting contrast to show that lack of like when When your vision is clouded and when you are allowed to surround yourself by "yes" people and blah blah blah, or all those other layers, it makes what came before that much more stark and worth exploring in my mind. right there you can look at apple too like so much so much of apple yeah see jog leads see jog leads in the 90s collapses they come back like and then iMac on it's been crazy well i i like i like the pro fails and like what's that all about we're calling that a failure now - And they officially started calling it a failure in the media. - In the media. - It's like, they're canceling next year's update and they're saying they're, you know, they're selling like half as many as they thought they would. So it's right now, it's a failure. I think in five years it'll be just fine, but. - I mean, Tesla versus. motor company, let's say. There's probably a different and interesting comparison, like Tesla versus 1960s Ferrari. You know, when Enzo Ferrari is still there. I think the Ford thing is actually really interesting, because most of us are... trapped in the boards of the world we're stuck in these Companies that have already existed for so long. Mm-hmm that the difference with Tesla was they had Kind of the same amount of resources as a big company like that But none of the baggage none of the baggage and they were doing this one thing. Yeah, that was radically different. Whereas Ford has no incentive to do that when they're still making all their money selling giant gas guzzling trucks, and the culture is so tied to like the, I'm sure there's the Ford way or whatever, and all of that. Inch. infrastructure that gets in the way of true deep design. So like how to even work this concept through the lens of like 95% of the time, which is like I work in a company that already exists, and I mean I was writing the coattails of idea that took them there. But it's become very, you know, all innovation is iterative innovation. You know, this year's F-150 is not that different than last year's F-150, it's not that different from the year before. If you skip ahead 10 years at a time, maybe you can start to see differences. much uselessly bigger than yeah why do they have that like giant flat front on them now it's like driving a brick around right I I was driving I was in California last weekend my parents have a Subaru the biggest I think it's the biggest super has like the three third row And oh the yeah, which is not yeah, the most egregious like giant SUV by any means But I was trying to go in like why is there so much space on the left of me? Yeah, like there's all this room here between me and the door. Yeah, and I'm struggling to get into a goddamn spot in the parking. Yeah in San Francisco. I don't need all this. Just smoosh it in. It just seems like this desire to like, oh we're just inflating. I'd love to bring my friend Dan Sturgis into that conversation. Dan lives here in town and was I think the easiest introduction to Dan is that he designed a tiny electric car, you actually know the one, it kind of looks like an egg in cross section. The Honda one? Bombardier bought the design, but that's been one of his big tropes for years, is why are we hauling around? thousands of parts, thousands of pounds of material, and moving that from one parking space in our garage to another parking space at our office to another parking space in the beautiful pedestrian downtown, for example, Boulder, where all we want to do is walk. and be with our friends and you know but in order to get there you got a hauled thousands of parts you know thousands of pounds and a bunch of air yeah and by the way there's probably one of you in that vehicle you know I mean I drove a rental a mile to New Orleans and was like, "This is absurd." Oh, yeah. Like, the center console is gigantic. You're like, "This is too much." You know? I had that experience with a rental. I was in, I don't know, San Jose or something, and I went to the airport. pick up my rental car and that's all they had was a white Escalade with gold trim on it. They're like, "It's what we have!" I was like, "Okay!" And you were giving me the compact car rate for it? Yeah, they gave me the compact car rate for it. But I got in that car, I boldly drove out of the rental lot. I drove around the block and I returned that car and he said Yeah, it's too much too much. Well, it speaks to the how If you think about the design process of making the 2023 escalator ever like Our that what questions are they asking and how are they going about answering and it does feel like it's making me think that there's an art and science to even how you're asking why what why's are you asking yeah yeah is there is clearly no it's this sort of like oh this is what these dumb gigantic people want or something or like The process of well, we just like inflate the carriers of vehicles and create this weird sense of like Extra space and then it just makes it way harder to drive the stupid thing and get in and out of it and like the Blind spots are bonkers. Yeah And that is somehow the solution and the annoying thing is like, yeah, that is what people are buying. So like, how to... Well, so let's try it in a different domain. I think you're, I think that's an interesting path I'd like to figure out if there are some some whys that would let you get at that. Yeah, so I have observed in Superior and in Louisville where we had the fire. Now people are getting their their houses have been rebuilt largely people are beginning to really move back into the neighborhood you drive by at night or lights on and that's wonderful you know it's like the community is is recovering and I can't help but notice every single one of those houses got bigger, not smaller. So they're on the same lot and they had, let's say, you know, 2,000, 2,500 square feet or something like that. They talked to their insurance, the house burns to the ground, they lose everything, amazing catastrophe, right? companies, the insurance companies, another whole set of catastrophes, right? But eventually, insurance companies pay out, people start construction. They don't think to themselves, I mean, so construction is way more expensive than it was when that house was built originally. The building codes and requirements are way more restricted. than they were when those houses were built originally, and yet, those things considered, people made bigger houses, and I actually talked to two people that are, in other ways, very intelligent people that make great decisions, and I asked the question specifically, you had less money. more restricted building codes, why did you end up with a bigger house? And they said, well, it's just, you know, that's it's worth more money if it's bigger. So they're thinking ahead to the potential sale of their house, thinking that more square feet are going to give them a higher price. of how much more it costs to build that house, to maintain it. - Just like square feet of tile in the kitchen. - Yeah, like the living in these giant, it's like you're in a, everything is a liminal space. There's like that weird thing on social media, like liminal spaces, you know. Weird hallways and stuff like that. creating all these Everything is bigger. Yeah So it's like that. It's a kind of inflation in a way a literal and Yeah, right. Let it go literal inflation. Yeah, it does feel that way a little bit like, you know you just you just took the old house and kind of You know blew it up a little bit But I think that's what you're saying about the cars So, you know, in the context of making design decisions, and maybe another way to think about a deepening design decision is that it's some kind of graph of decisions. You know, I made this decision, and therefore I have these two choices, and therefore I have those two choices, and you're sort of navigating through a bit. decision tree in a way. So where is it that you make, where do you make a wrong turn in that graph that leads you to, you want to make a greenhouse, you want to make an affordable house, you want to make a house that's lovely to live in, you want to you want to have a garage that you can park a car in that gets you to where you need to go and it's reliable. Reliable and why not make it a you know a green car Why not make it up, you know, so all knowing all of those things at the beginning It still kind of goes to shit at the end. Yeah so How how could you it's a reverse, you know the thing where when you start to? Consider one of our green solutions for your house. We're going to put solar on our roof. Then you go, "Oh, well, we need to improve the insulation on our house. That will reduce the energy use." It becomes this virtuous cycle. It starts to impact everything in your house. Suddenly you have a house that is like, my bills are $12 a month or whatever, or negative. It's that virtuous cycle, and there's a reversal of that, it feels like, where one thing goes off the rails and everything else does too, because your mindset has shifted away from the original intention. tent toward the beast just getting bigger and having more cup holders. Right. Like this it goes away from well we know people want cup holders let's put 50 more like that it's like that sort of solution or decision making rather than like how might we... Well, there was a there was a trend really fucking cool like really like oh, it just feels good in here And I think that's what Tesla was doing Like the times I've driven. Oh, yeah, Tesla's dead. I guess - crazy like getting on the highway. I actually laugh out loud Yeah, because of how nuts it feels right? I think that's where you feel it actually in your nuts. Yeah, but the, uh, I think, I mean, the Model 3 is taking some, this year's Model 3 doesn't have a turn indicator stalk, and it also doesn't have a stalk to turn the windshield wipers on and off. Is it all, how do you turn? So they've been, they're now buttons on the steering wheel, so instead of flipping a knob up or down to turn... left or right you press a button for left or a button for right and it takes like you know five minutes to get accustomed to that yep or at least for me I'm not struggling it's like closer to a video game controller yeah she kind of is maybe that's the ultimate it's an Xbox but what that allowed them to do reduce clutter from the instrument console, right? And, you know, another negative argument is that everything is just driving towards that big screen, you know, all your controls are on the big screen. So, if I'm driving and looking at the screen, I'm going to have an accident, right? But I think Tesla has been really good about reducing clutter. reducing the design and reducing the number of parts in the car, right? I mean, they've also created an audience that will allow that to happen. Yeah, and, and actually because like they celebrate, right? You give me back my turn signal stick. That's Ford's customer. Yeah. Yeah. Whereas Tesla's customer's like, "Oh, those wacky Tesla people, they took away the thing." And then you find it's like, "I don't even care." Right. Right. You're like, "Really? I have to have like a neural implant to shunt it into my back brain to control the car?" Okay. (laughing) - Yeah, but I wonder, so is this a question of governance? So if there is a design which deepens over time, let's say, and that that's defined as navigating through your decision. tree to get to deeper and deeper layers in the problem. How do you keep it on track versus going wildly out of control in the negative direction? Or I suppose you could go wildly out of control in the positive direction as well and just be too much change, like people wouldn't like it. It's too much change. Like, I'm not gonna stick something in my brain to control a car. That probably would be over a limit for me, but... The design that deepens over time, that notion is really interesting to me as a... Yeah, okay. Because there is that sense of time, that it's not one and done, but... that also the design that you create, like I'm looking at a MacBook Pro, so like this had to come out on the market. They had to stop iterating, but then the next one will come out and it did that. Right. They have an approach of deepening design, the design every time they don't try to make it cheaper. - Yeah, it becomes more and more of itself over time. Yeah, I mean, if you, do you remember the original Power Books? The one that Sony made, the Power Book 100? It had like a big track ball on it, black, sort of dark gray plastic. I think it had a grayscale screen on the clamshell. There are some design elements that started there and they were radical at the time. Other people were making laptops. But what I remember most about that was that Apple took the keyboard, everybody else was putting the keyboard on the front. Okay, so here, this is, you know, the clamshell. Everybody else is putting the keyboard here. Apple said, "No, let's put the keyboard back, and we'll have a palm rest in the front, and we'll have a place to put the trackball." And that'll be better. You have a place to put your hands, and then you can type on the keyboard more efficiently rather than you're hovering over the front. that laptop in front of you still has that characteristic. So that was a design decision that was made very, very early. I mean, what year was that even? '90 something? Yeah. Well, I feel like the Power Books were mid '90s. Those are pretty consistent. So there's probably some early iteration that was late '80s, early '90s. So I know there was um, there was a project Yeah Was it called the power book? It was the power book 100 was the first one then Apple didn't manufacture it Sony actually manufactured it But but that's probably about the right time. 91. 91. Okay. Yeah 16 megahertz, how about that? 6800, 68020 maybe. Nine inch display, look at that. Yeah, black and white as well. Right, but that was, you know, every Wall Street, you know, analyst had to have one of those. I mean, that was a cool machine. Two to eight megabytes of memory. But I think you're onto something. with you know Apple Apple didn't take a decision to make I mean that computer probably cost $2,500 I guess that was the yes that was the actual was that actually the price that was the MSRP so this computer that you have here is roughly still $2,500. Kind of $2,500 for the one that you want. Yeah, and I actually remember, even all the way back to, I grew up with an Apple II Plus, and guess how much it cost? Wasn't that thing like $3,000 or $4,000? It was about $2,500. $2,500, okay. Yeah, and that was, you know, two floppy drives and a little extra memory and, you know, solid keyboard and that stuff. So really, Apple... I mean, I guess if you adjust for inflation and all the other things, maybe the price is modestly going down. It is. Well, it said the inflation-adjusted price is $5,600. Yeah. Introductory price $2,500. Okay. Equivalent to $5,600 in 2023. So... That's a lot of money. that is so expensive relatively I mean I got a my first Mac was a 1999 the top the green tower mm-hmm which was like 3,000 bucks with the on the separate monitor the handles on the top yeah yeah then I got then I got an iMac the g4 iMac so that was market be less money but then I got a MacBook Pro and that was relatively the same price as the tower and like it's you just expect to pay for a high-end Mac like 25 to 2800 something like that. Yeah and maybe you know you keep them ratified. like improved thing each time. Each time, right. But to your... You're not paying $5,000 for it. Right. But to your point, I mean, you can pay anything you want. You can't pay $5,000. I think you can pay $25,000 for a studio. Well, you can get like a gold-plated one or something. Yeah, I don't know. It has extra... you know, has extras. Yeah. But, okay, so Apple perhaps took the position that starting from the PowerBook 100, they deepened the design, deepened it, deepened it, deepened it, deepened it for 20 years. Right? 30 years, and... that Mac book versus the power book is Is a pretty radically different machine. Yeah, but still has a lot of the same characteristics So did Apple decide to improve? rather than Commoditize. Yeah, like they knew everybody was always going to have a great machine at a price which is you know, people can pay, versus, you know, I don't know, pick the other, Dell, let's pick Dell as the other side of it. Dell would try to get a better and better machine at a lower and lower price. With parts that they don't make. Right. I mean, Apple going to the M1 was a huge decision to say, "We don't just care about the raw..." Like, it's not the same... That feels like a choice to say, "Well, no, we're not just making a new laptop every year." It has to be towards something different like Meant to be radical leaps and performance for the type of people we want to be to use our laptops which are like creatives who wanted to Really advance stuff like video for example being able to edit a Hollywood movie on your laptop essentially is what they're trying to do with the n-series or a grammy-winning album yeah or you know and at some point you're like yeah there's only so far you can take that like you don't my Bye. 2016 MacBook Pro I'm still using like it's still doing its job Almost to like Apple's detriment, you know, or it's like we made it too good. That's not even an M1 Yeah, I mean I feel an Intel shit. I think I used to buy a new computer every Two or three years. Well, they would become unusable like my last I had a that G4, oh no I had a Macbook Pro before that. At some point the internet and general software becomes too, the computer can't deal with it anymore and it just becomes a nightmare to use. That isn't true anymore. I started buying Mac Minis for use at home. bought a I still have an Intel Mac yeah it's probably six or seven years old yeah and you know I packed it with like 64 gigs of RAM or something like that it's still like there's no reason not to use it yeah I mean it's actually kind of great what's interesting I saw way more money in the monitor by the way than I did in that well the internet is going off the rails despite It's interesting like I'm sort of It feels it's so easy to talk about Apple. That's the deepest I think but like they're they're living in a world where they are coming, they're butting up against the reality that the internet, which is so critical to what people, like what computing is today, is becoming a nightmare. But then also they're butting up against like the government suing them for being too good, essentially. you could get up to monopolistic, whatever. I think that's kind of where I was headed with, you know, is there is there a governance to the deepening of design that matters, right? And, you know, it's like do it yourself or somebody else is going to do it for you, like the last person you want governing your design decisions is probably the Federal Trade Commission, you know? Like, if it's gotten to that point, somebody made a mistake really early. Right, and like, it's one thing to be like, "Yeah, we could have made this USBC." Like, "Yeah, okay, fine." And they did. Now, which, it's funny, because my family all has new phones. I was like, "Oh, can I borrow a charger?" My mom gave me the charger, and I didn't work. - You can't use that. - The universal charger doesn't work. But it's, that's like small ball stuff. 'Cause the government is not set up to. - No, the government is not. - Because it is structured in short-term ways, and I wonder, I guess, yeah, I'm curious about like, thinking about deep design in a vacuum as in an ideal state, and then, versus reality of like, even working in a Toyota, where they do, they have institutionalized the asking of why five times, they are also still just iterating. Like, they're not making, they made a Prius, but like, yeah, that was 15 years ago or whatever, and like, that wasn't, I mean, it was pretty, you could, that was pretty radical at the time, for sure. Twice as many parts. But yes, not solving. It's not like, I'm guessing every three years or something like that, you know, like, whereas... So how about a different definition of governance? So instead, like a speed governor, or the governor on a steam engine. So what it's really doing is... Um... I mean, the image I have is, you know, the spinning thing, and when it spins too fast, it closes the valve or something, right? So it doesn't do anything unless it's spinning fast enough. So is there a, with that as a metaphor, is there a way to think about, kind of govern governing the design process yeah to damp out catastrophe like you at some point you have to actually make something at some point you have that so yeah okay all right and yeah go but also I remember something it was with like It was, I remember a drawing in some business class, some textbook, of a car that was like, well this is the car that we did all this customer research and this is the car that people actually want, and it's terrible. Yeah. Like the, what was the car's name, the Aztec or something? The Edsel? Well the Edsel, that's a better example, yeah. That was a fort wasn't it? Yeah, that's all we gave you everything you wanted. Yeah. Yeah, it's like it's garbage So, but I think my father actually wrote a paper once about how brilliant the Edsel actually was actually You know that that regulatory That person or people who are able to iterate deeply, but then also find that cutoff point. That's a really interesting moment in time. Asking the why's, you still have to... when you've gotten enough information and then know what to do with that information because like if the fifth why says well because I got made fun of in school like how are you changing that's not helping yeah to address exactly that's not helping yeah so so I have another I have another paper I'll It's this one about, and then I should probably head back downhill, but this is the paper I alluded to it earlier, that it was looking at musicians, particularly jazz musicians that were engaged in improvisational playing, and I figured this might resonate with it, and I want to say there were like three categories. Or as musicians, they looked at musicians who were relatively young and inexperienced and still kind of learning their instrument. Musicians that knew their instrument, but were sort of learning how to be improvisers, and then skilled improvisers, and just looking at which parts of their brains lit up, and what I remember so far from it was that, you know, the newbies, the parts of their brains that were active were the parts of their brains where they were very analytical. You know, like, where do I need to put my finger? How fast do I need to, how hard, you know. What chord are they playing and how do I make that chord? Exactly. part of their brain. The people in the middle didn't have that, but their, the kind of executive function parts of their brains would light up while their, the creative parts of their brains were working, and so there was kind of this, like, you know, creativity, creativity. creating new ideas, leaps of logic, intuition, those kinds of things, were being controlled very closely by an executive function, and then the skilled improvisers, it was just all the creative part. >> Mm-hm. >> So maybe that's something, maybe there's a hint. there of where the governance, the governor might come from. So, you know, is there sort of an interplay between the free, you know, free associating, I saw a blue sky and thought of the smell of cinnamon, you know, whatever. with more analytical decision-making part. I'm also hearing a sort of practical like you just have at a certain point you just have to put hours into a thing - right and that's okay and that's what school is supposed to be and what internship or apprenticeship is supposed to be. I think apprenticeship in particular is very much that. You have to hammer a ton of nails before you get really good at it, or whatever, or understand how, I don't know. - I mean, that's another sort of. deepening act, right? - Yeah, and I think there's something about the practica, like the grounded, like you just have to, part of the design and deep work in any way is like getting to that point of being able to do deep work. - Yep, yep. - And the hours, the literal training of your brain. required to get there. Yeah, and that's not a bad thing. No, in fact, I think we should respect it and celebrate it and maybe that's actually one of the qualities that makes me most uncomfortable about design thinking and the sort of orthodoxy around we have this process Any moron can follow the process and and we're gonna end up with a good result and not to be an elitist about it, but you know, maybe There's more to it than that. Yeah, you know And the self-awareness piece I think there's Something that builds up where you can't, I don't know, there's something about a certain awareness that you start to have, even with like working with, you know, our student designers on stuff where I'm like, two, two pixels to the left, or right, and why do you know that, but you do. It just is, and we agree on it, and then it suddenly feels right. There's that sense of, okay, I think we have some sense here that we have developed over time that can give us that sense of like, yes, this is right. I think when we think intuition, we think like everyone's got that intuition, but it's not, that's not really what intuition is. It's not skilled intuition. Yeah, like intuition is built over so long that it's that, that like path toward that sense of inevitability in your mind. Like you have to build that up. Well, I wonder if actually that's... That doesn't line up with these. I mean, I'll send you the paper and I'd be interested to know what you what you make of it And I'm probably projecting into it as well But you know, it sort of sounds like in your your your knowledge that it needs to be two pixels to the left Can you explain that? Maybe not but it is true and it over time probably tested out that most of the time it's true. So that's in a sense like the jazz musician that's, you know, I love that line from Miles Davis, "Miles, what are you going to play?" He says, "I don't know. I'll tell you after I play it." So maybe that's the sort of apex design intuition. design that we want to get everybody to. Before that, there's probably some period where you're like, "I just know it needs to be two pixels to the left," and I think that's because here's some rule system that I understand, and you know, I understand that if it's two pixels to the left, it's lining up with this other thing, and so you have a sort of an analytical framework. supports the intuitive decision that you've made, and maybe that comes first or maybe that comes second and it's a question of building confidence in your intuitive decision-making, and then before all of that, learn the damn rules system. It's probably gonna work. Do that a thousand, ten thousand times, right? And then you'll be ready to act intuitively. Having to explain how, how, why you're making the choice you're making is actually part of it. Like, asking a kid, "Oh, did you like that movie?" "Yeah, it was cool." "Why?" "Why? Why did you like that?" That piece is really important, and I'm learning that with... working in a creative director or art director type of role at times, being able to articulate to someone else why something works or doesn't work or what needs to change about it is extremely difficult and a really important skill to learn. We're not, design school doesn't really teach you that exactly. Like intuitively, I think you'll have, you'll get critiques and things like that, but I, my sense in having worked in design realms in an agency, for example, like It is a lot of shit figuring out how stuff works and how to do all that I My sense is that most designers do not know how to communicate Design needs or like how to make something better The whole like client relationship is always almost inevitably crazy. Like it's rare that you get that creative director and that's what they're supposed to do that can be that translator yeah yeah but most people don't understand that that's the role of a creative director and it's crazy that we have not articulated that in business that like creative directors are really good at communicating about design in ways that people don't even understand because most people don't. They just go, "I don't like pink," and that's the end of it, and that is such a big part of the design process is that communication piece. I think building those skills over time is really an important part of getting to deeper design. Whether or not it's like deep design. That communication piece, and then the decision, getting to a decision. Yeah. Well I want to think about that more. There's a... I know Mark and I have talked about it before, but I don't know, have you read the... and reflective practitioner or something like this I think that's reflective you might you might be interested in that so she fell last night s a bunch of particular yeah okay yeah that's Asia SCA John with a new lap yeah So, he pitches this idea that he calls reflection in action, which suggests there's a duality between actions and then reflecting on the action, which might be kind of what you're describing. Yeah. Whether you can reflect on it. Can you verbalize? you know, but I think the reflection is also about, you know, was the action the right action? Should I try a different action? What action should I try next? And he describes intuition as being, or the flow state, which is what the paper that I'll send is about, flow state. But he says that it's inaction that you were acting and reflecting simultaneously. Which might be a distinct description of that sort of middle state where you're analyzing and you're being creative at the same time, and maybe eventually you throw the analysis out and you just do the creative part. Yeah, because in the lower state... In my experience, you're not consciously analyzing, you're.., and you could probably post-rationalize. Yeah, you could maybe say, "Okay, maybe there's some processing going on that I'm unaware of, but right now I'm playing the guitar and noises are coming out of it, that's what I'm..." That's just what my brain does, right? It just does that picturing myself in that flow state. I am in There's no other way to say it except I am in the music like yeah, you're really You are it's hard to explain but there's a sort of blending of visual and sonic Yeah Well, maybe you're a little It's an aesthetic, which is a possibility, but I can see, that's hard to explain, but yeah, it's not a, I wouldn't say there's like reflection happening consciously in that process. It's something, it just happens.