## Carry a sketchbook, really.
I made this claim before, but I’ll emphasize it to drive home the point. Because you can’t always be sure you’ll be at your desk when inspiration strikes, you should always carry a sketchbook. Also, because you need the practice, no matter how good you think you are. It doesn’t have to be anything nice, and you never have to show the sketches you’re doing in it to anyone else, but know that it is always with you if you need to jot something down.
I have years’ worth of old sketchbooks tucked away on a bookshelf in my house. They are nothing special, mostly, and I rarely look back through them. Sometimes, when I do, I cringe a little. But keeping them around reminds me that I have been sketching for a pretty long time. It is an excellent sense of history for me. And evidence of practice.
As a design professional, you’re not going to be able to restrict your design thinking to typical office working hours. Design doesn’t work like that. Keeping a sketchbook means you can capture some thought or idea you have about a project you’re working on whenever and wherever it happens to strike you. There doesn’t have to be much work done to capture the thought, but the more practiced you are, the easier it will be to capture those thoughts. Some design ideas, especially the ones you need for the most thorny of design problems, can be distressingly fleeting. Almost like when you wake from a dream and try to remember what happened in it. Your brain stores design ideas in a way that is almost more like a dream than a tactical problem solution.
But specifically, in the context of physical sketching, you become better with practice. A sketchbook is also a personal challenge and a traveling reminder of the work you’ve committed yourself to do. Sketch something every single day, for a project you’re paid to work on or not doesn’t matter. Be that mysterious person on the train who is drawing the old lady sitting across from her. Be the artsy-fartsy guy sitting in front of the public library, sketching the elaborate beaux-arts facade. Always be sketching something, and take your time at it. You can give up half an hour a couple times a week to practicing your drawing. It is worth it.

#footnotes #images